---
layout: post
title: "A diagrammatic approach to factorizing F-matrices in XXZ and XXX spin chains (PhD thesis)"
date: 2015-10-01
tags: ["publication", "phd thesis", ]
---

Suporvisor: Omar Foda (based on publications with Michael Wheeler)

Abstract: The aim of this thesis is a better understanding of certain mathematical structures which arise in integrable spin chains. Specifically, we are concerned with XXZ and XXX Heisenberg spin-1/2 chains and their generalizations.

The mathematical structures in question are the \\( F \\)-matrix (a symmetrising, change-of-basis operator) and the Bethe eigenvectors (the eigenvectors of the transfer matrix of integrable spin chains). A diagrammatic tensor notation represents these operators in a way which is intuitive and allows easy manipulation of the relations involving them. The sun F-matrix is a representation of a Drinfel'd twist of the \\( R \\)-matrix of the quantum algebra \\( U_q(\mathfrak{su}_n) \\) and its associated Yangian \\( Y(su_n) \\). The \\( F \\)-matrices of these algebras have proven useful in the calculation of scalar products and domain wall partition functions in the spin-1/2 XXZ model. In this thesis we present a factorized diagrammatic expression for the \\( \mathfrak{su}_2 \\) \\( F \\)-matrix equivalent to the algebraic expression of Maillet and Sanchez de Santos. Next we present a fully factorized expression for the \\( \mathfrak{su}_n \\) and \\( F \\)-matrix which is of a similar form to that of Maillet and Sanchez de Santos for the \\( \mathfrak{su}_2 \\) \\( F \\)-matrix and equivalent to the unfactorized expression of Albert, Boos, Flume and Ruhlig for the \\( \mathfrak{su}_n \\) \\( F \\)-matrix.
            
Using a diagrammatic description of the nested algebraic Bethe Ansatz, we present an expression for the eigenvectors of the \\( \mathfrak{su}_n \\) transfer matrix as components of appropriately selected \\( \mathfrak{su}_n \\) \\( F \\)-matrices. Finally, we present expressions for the sun elementary matrices (and therefore the local spin operators in the case of \\( \mathfrak{su}_2 \\) in terms of components of the \\( \mathfrak{su}_n \\) monodromy matrix.

[PDF document](https://minerva-access.unimelb.edu.au/handle/11343/58978)
